# Conclusion

## Technological Achievements

Bikeshares have continued to become ingrained into modern cities as an economical, environmental, and enjoyable mode of transportation.  College campuses would benefit from similar systems; however college students have different needs than most users in cities.  Students will take greater number of shorter trips, where parking location is of utmost importance.  To meet the need of students, the bikeshare technology must find a balance between flexibility in bike parking and security.  The RedBar smartlock achieves both through the innovative approach of a novel mechanical design and NFC-controlled access, scalable communication system, and real-time web application.  With the introduction of the smartlock, biking can become a hyper-efficient and enjoyable transportation method for college students across the country.
While the team relied on personal experience as college students, the team drew most of its inspiration and insight from questioning peers.  The team received both formal feedback from the focus group discussion and informal feedback through conversations with peers.  Both forms of feedback drove the team's iterative design process and helped us focus on the systems level components that mattered to college students.  Necessary components included pricing, quality metrics of a bikeshare smartlock, and user expectations, among other relevant topics.
The mechanical lock and housing design subteam incorporated user feedback, primary research, and an iterative design process to create a novel smartlock mechanism and device.  The Locking subteam examined the leading bike lock designs and sought to better understand the material selection and design flaws of the current available options.  From the primary research, the subteam developed two unique smartlock designs and selected the loop lock, considered the most intuitive and reliable when tested with users.  For the final design, the team was able to manufacture a steel lock to demonstrate the techniques necessary for production and the strength of a proper material.  Through the fabrication, material testing, and user feedback, the Locking subteam brought insight into what the next generation of bike locks may offer for a campus bikeshare future.
To digitally secure the bike, the team needed a technology that met the user needs for accessibility, but met the technical needs of a large, multi-user distributed bikeshare.  Similar to the approach taken in addressing the mechanical needs, the team chose to begin by researching the state of the art and gaining an understanding of access technologies.  Elechouse NFC 2.0 was selected over RFID and Bluetooth because of the low power requirements, protection against man in the middle attacks, activation distance, and other critical features.  Integrating the technology into the Arduino controller, the team demonstrated how users could be verified and securely activate a lock or unlock event.  Integrating the digital control with the lock proved challenging.  Working closely with the Locking subteam and after designing multiple approaches, the team finalized a mechanical pin system that met the engineering and user constraints of simplicity, reliability, and low power needs.
Creating the technology to coordinate an often haphazard distribution of bikes requires highly effective and reliable communication technology.  Losing communication with a bike can be an expensive mishap and out of date bike information can frustrate users.  The Geolocation subteam considered GSM/GPRS network or local BlueTooth modules to communicate back to a central database, but found that both technologies would be too expensive.  Instead, the subteam utilized XBee modules to prototype a unique, scalable, and campus-wide mesh network able to support hundreds of bikes.  The team proved the application of this technology by collecting signal strength readings on McKeldin Mall and other locations on campus.  While XBee modules are mostly used in small scale internet of things implementations for a home or small building, the outdoor application of a mesh network for a bikeshare is novel.  The RSSI readings and analysis of XBee modules for bikeshare applications will expand the potential application of this technology to meet the need of cost-effective stationless bikeshares or for large scale internet of things technology.
The last component of the system was an effective web portal for users to view the data collected in real time and for administrators to actively manage a large distributed bikeshare.  The team evaluated multiple options and chose to pursue a newly developed technology with high potential, Meteor.js.  The Geolocation subteam built a real-time web application hosted at http://redbarbikes.com, where bikeshare users can see the location of any available bike and learn more about the system.  Incorporating feedback from the focus group, the subteam implemented features such as a reservation system and improved the onboarding experience.  To benefit future bikeshare developers and existing ventures, the team chose to open-source the project and released several reusable packages applicable to a larger audience.
The combination of a novel mechanical smartlock design, digital access control, a scalable communication network, and an open-source web application allow for the next generation of bikeshares across the nation.  Based on the continuous feedback and input the team received from university students, the technology and user experience are crafted for the unique aspects of a college campus unlike any other bikeshare technology.  The stationless component particularly stands out when compared to station-based bikeshares as it can utilize existing infrastructure without changing the architectural character or requiring major construction.  The smartlock concept additionally offers flexibility in bike-type selection, improved scalability, cost-effective benefits, and an enjoyable user experience unmatched by current technologies.

## Lessons Learned

Developing these novel technologies took overcoming a wide variety of challenges that are applicable to any similar endeavor.  The team had to build cohesion and surmount the vast technical challenges posed on several fronts.  To breakdown the content, the team split into four subteams, each tackling a portion of the problem.  The teams were not only selected by the type of technical challenges, but also represented the unique skillset of each member.  The project was initiated to develop an energy-translation device aimed at making biking safer.  Realizing that the team could make a broader impact to bicycling safety by reducing the barriers to entry in cycling with a bikeshare, the team pursued a new idea and reorganized the team accordingly.  As ideas continually morphed and new technologies were selected, and a website was added, the team struggled to stay focused and coordinate thirteen members.  In order to ensure cohesion, the team created an explicit organization structure with team leaders, subteam leaders, and other specific roles.
An additional future implementation would attempt to reduce the cost of each bike unit by leveraging the signal strength readings from XBee modules to geolocate the bicycles.  Taking the signal strength, the known locations of the routers, and the known locations of bicycle racks as the only possible bicycle locations, it may be possible to eliminate the need for a GPS in the smartlock, thus reducing the cost of each smartlock by $40.  Future research could be done to determine if this is a feasible geolocation option.
Each subteam faced unique challenges related to the technical components. The locking subteam struggled with designing both for manufacturing and for a prototype.  Often designing for one type of manufacturing can be misleading as there are many ways to produce a product.  Instead, effort is better spent building a prototype with some thought of manufacturing.  While developing for a mature and well-established product, the XBee modules, the Geolocation subteam struggled with the learning curve and complexities of the system.  Through explorative learning, the subteam experimented with the modules to gain an understanding of potentially useful features and limitations.  The unguided learning process aided particularly when troubleshooting errors.  After developing a large part of the mechanical design and the electronics in the smartlock, the team realized the need for an additional technology to manage the bike system at a higher level.  Lacking a solid foundation in web technologies and other inventory management options, the team sought an alternative that would have a minimal learning curve and could be implemented within the time frame.  The team built several “hello world” applications in a variety of backend and frontend languages including Ruby, SQL, Node.js, Meteor, and others.  By gaining exposure to many options, the team was able to identify and commit to Meteor at an early stage rather than making the switch well into the development phase.  Through building a comparatively simple web application in several languages, the experience helped identify major pain points and needs of working on a full scale web application.

## Future Directions

The ultimate goal of this project was to develop and demonstrate a novel smartlock to pioneer the future of college campus bikeshares.  If given additional time, the team would have pursued a small-scale implementation of the smartlock system on the University of Maryland, College Park campus.  The Geolocation subteam discusses the minimally viable network that could serve a small group of students until the system was ready to expand campus wide.  If successful, the technology would be ready to be incorporated into a company and developed commercially.  With the conclusion of this Gemstone research project, there is an incredible opportunity to continue and implement a smartlock-based bikeshare.  The team demonstrated the university need by interviewing and working closely with students and has solved many of the technical and design challenges.  The next step would be to deploy this technology on a campus and to continue to iterate and improve the design.  Ultimately, this technology will serve as the foundation of a successful business.
To prepare for a possible implementation, the team designed a process to scalably deploy the system.  The team planned out potential XBee module locations, developed the bike lock for easy manufacturing, and selected a cost-effective bike model for a bikeshare.  These considerations taken into account, it is possible to purchase the necessary items and begin scaling a bikeshare from ten bikes or fewer to over several hundred on a large campus.  For a future implementation there will likely need to be progress in troubleshooting the XBee system and maintaining a reliable system as unanticipated bugs appear as the system scales.  The potential for next generation, sustainable, and profitable bikeshare technology developed in this project can only be realized through implementing the proposed full scale bikeshare system.
Additionally, the use of the received signal strength could potentially be combined with the known XBee parent nodes and the known bike rack locations in order to geolocate the bikes. Similar strategies have been implemented in various scalable wireless networks (Agarwal et al., 2001), so the use of the signal strength could accurately locate the bikes and lead to great cost savings and improved geolocation capabilities in areas where GPS modules may not function as well.
Granted more time and financial support, an improved method for powering the electronic system on the smartlock should be further considered and researched.  The current iteration uses a lithium-ion battery to power the on board electronics which requires replacing or recharging the battery when exhausted.  Future work could focus on alternative methods for harvesting and generating electricity on board the smartlock to reduce maintenance.  Research regarding solar panel solutions should be explored to determine the feasibility and cost of installing solar panel system to increase operating time of the smartlock.  The battery life and performance for the smartlock is directly related to the proper operation of the smartlock and requires further development for a fully operational system.
To best protect all the components housed inside, fully metal prototypes of the entire lock should be manufactured out of steel.  These models should be failure tested to confirm the predicted FEA results of the design.  There could be inconsistencies in the manufactured models that are not represented in an idealized computer model.  As the electronics are finalized and the circuit profile is minimized, the shape and size of the electronics housing should be finalized and shaped out of sheet metal then folded and welded in the final form.  The team did not previously manufacture the housing out of steel because the electronics profile had not been finalized.