# Development

As discussed during the Literature Review chapter, the development of a stationless bikeshare is a process that draws on technologies from many different industries.  The proposed research fields run the gamut from business to wireless communication and no single research methodology exists for gathering all of the data necessary to establish a proof-of-concept of a stationless bikeshare.  Additionally, Team BIKES’ project deviates from the traditional model of research in that the team’s ultimate “experiment” is the iterative development of a novel system, not the validation of an existing system or hypothesis.  As such, the team’s development is best expressed as a progression from initial design decisions to final integration of the system.

Specifically, the team's Development chapter is separated into two sections: discovery and iteration.  Each of these sections is then divided into the concepts that each subteam or subteams worked through during a given stage.  The result is a chronological account of the team progression as a whole with each subteam's interrelated results presented sequentially.  This organization style also clarifies the influence of each subteam’s results on the decisions made by the other subteams throughout the research process.

During the discovery stage, the subteams worked in parallel to finalize the decisions concerning the technology that would be used in the bikeshare system.  The subteams worked independently to decide and explore the design spaces established during the literature review; in general, this took the form of either basic prototyping, or hardware experimentation.  This stage was to be completed quickly to link the knowledge acquired during the literature review and the practical implementation of the system.

The subteams then refined the designs during the iteration stage.   The approach used during this stage varied across subteams, from additional hardware experimentation and force modeling to focus group interactions.  Regardless of the manner each team went about, the ultimate objective was to find optimal solutions to the problems each subteam set out to solve.  The Integration chapter following the Development chapter will discuss the approach that the team took to join the separate threads of the project into a functional system.

