## Access Control

The three access control methods considered for the bikeshare system are Bluetooth, Radio Frequency Identification (RFID), and Near Field Communications (NFC) wireless communication technologies.  These technologies are attractive options because of their wide range of current applications in access control.  The popularity of these technologies also provides the team with options of a variety of available existing hardware and software for use.

Bluetooth.  Bluetooth is a form of wireless communication that allows the exchange of large data through electromagnetic radiation, often viewed as the replacement of physical wires between devices (Timalsina, Bhusal, & Moh, 2012).  The physical wire is replaced either by the “pairing” of devices or establishing a distinguished connection between hardware before exchange of data.  During pairing, one device takes the role of a master and the other takes the role of a slave, which is left to act according to the input from the master.  Although the master node can have infinite slave nodes, the master is limited to communications with only seven of the slave nodes at once.  To circumvent this constraint, Bluetooth networks are created in which devices act as both master and slave in relation to other devices.  Following the slave and master protocol, the network can be designed to follow a desired logical protocol, enabling the connection of all devices in the network.

Bluetooth technology is currently applied most commonly in wireless phones, computers, and their respective accessories.  The Bluetooth connections between wireless phones and accessories or wireless phones to wireless phones allow for the transfer of relatively large data including music, contact information, images, and videos (Zaruba, Basagni, & Chlamtac, 2001).  Recently, Bluetooth technologies have become a more common method of access control with the introduction of Bluetooth locks on the market.  These locks allow users to lock and unlock their doors and garages through a mobile phone established as the Bluetooth master (Andersson, 2014).  Certain master devices are declared during initial setup and allowed access, making Bluetooth optimal for use with personal items.  The aforementioned BitLock is a one of the recent examples of personalized Bluetooth locks introduced in the market.

RFID.  RFID is another popular form of wireless communication commonly used in access control.  A RFID system is comprised of two parts: a reader and a responder.  The reader is the active component of the system that generates a radio frequency.  In proximity, a responder will return unique self-identifying information to the reader for authentication.  The first use of RFID technology was during World War II, in which the British attached transponders to their fighter planes to easily distinguish incoming planes as friend or foe, known as the Identity Friend or Foe (IFF) system.  The IFF system resourcefully took advantage of the fact that multiple responders with one reader made the technology well fitted for inventory purposes (Want, 2006).  The next major RFID application was the Electronic Article Surveillance (EAS) theft deterrence system which was introduced commercially to the United States in the 1960’s.  The EAS system places transponders on store inventory, which must be physically removed upon purchase of the items.  Standing RFID readers are stationed at the store exits and will trigger an alarm if transponders on items are not removed before leaving the store.  EAS systems are still common and widely used in shopping establishments (Want, 2006).

Another common use of RFID technology was first introduced in the 1980’s in the form of electronic toll systems that tagged unique cars.  The toll system operated with RFID readers placed at each toll gate and each car in the system was issued a unique transponder.  Each time the readers at the toll gate recognizes a transponder, the account linked to detected transponder is billed.  A common example of this application is the EZ-Pass service, which is a combination of stations on toll roads and an EZ-pass transponder placed inside each user’s car.  This system not only allowed for easier handling of toll fees but contributed to data generation of traffic trends (Domdouzis, Kumar, & Anumba, 2007).

Continued advances in shrinking RFID transponders and readers have launched a recent trend to use RFID systems as inventory methods in many fields, replacing the barcode system.  RFID is preferred over the barcode system because radio frequency communications only require proximity, not a direct line of sight.  Furthermore, these inventory systems are much more efficient compared to barcode systems since the need to actively read each barcode with an infrared beam is eliminated.  The RFID responders could be programmed to hold several pieces of identifying information about the object such as encoded data representing an unique ID that are important to the inventory system (Preradovic, Balbin, Karmakar, & Swiegers, 2008).  For large supply chain operations, standardizing the RFID inventory system through each stage of production enables easy management of items through their production, packaging, transportation, and sales.  The RFID log of inventory will also provide the potential for data collection of products and sales (Domdouzis, Kumar, & Anumba, 2007).

RFID systems are also desirable in access control methods and are currently used in a variety of security measures, such as key fobs and public transportation cards.  The benefit of using an RFID access control system is that the responder assigned to represent a user is also able to hold other information.  Such information possibly includes levels of security clearance or other limitations, which allows for more complex designs in access control system.

NFC.  NFC is the final mode of wireless communication for the proposed smartlock.  NFC is a specialized form of RFID operating in even closer proximity.  The defining quality of NFC is that there is no set distinction between a reader and a transponder in a system (Curran, Millar, & McGarvey, 2012). Any NFC device communicating with another NFC can assume the role of transponder or reader, depending on the desired situation.  The ability to act as either the reader or the transponder allows NFC technologies to operate in three different operating modes: reader/writer, card emulation, and peer-to-peer. The Reader/Writer mode is the most common of the three possible operations for NFC technologies.  The reader/writer mode is often designed around the NFC in smartphones and allows users to access the system through their mobile device (Timalsina, Bhusal, & Moh, 2012).

Even within the reader/writer mode, a variety of systems can exist.  Some will assume the user as a reader while others will assume the user as a transponder in the system.  Smart posters, a recent NFC application, are useful in spreading information.  They contain NFC transponders with an electronic version of posted information to be read and shared using an individual's NFC devices.  Oppositely, recent NFC advances in hospitals treat individual NFC enabled devices as transponders.  NFC enabled medical devices can directly update the patient’s status through hospital readers.  The NFC transponders issued to each patient is an easy method of identification and tracking patients progress throughout large hospital systems.  Reader/writer NFC systems are very similar to RFID systems and are fairly simple to design and implement (Ok, Aydin, Coskun, & Ozdenizci, 2011).

NFC can also be used in the card-emulation mode in which NFC devices act as NFC cards meant to interact with designated readers.  The card-emulation form of NFC is a recent trend driven by the evolution of smartphones and mobile technology.  The greatest benefit of the card-emulation mode is that one NFC enabled device may hold and distinguish the information of multiple NFC cards, an attribute that is mostly used in NFC payments and access control.  NFC payment refers to paying with NFC enabled devices, such as smartphones, rather than cash or credit cards.  NFC enabled credit cards as well as smartphones linked to credit cards are able to communicate all of the relevant information needed for a purchase with a payment reader instantly.  Following the same idea, card-emulation is often used for access control methods.  Certain high power NFC devices, including phones, are able to store access information from other NFC systems to be used in later instances.  It is possible for an individual's smartphone to act as a key fob or credit card after initial storage of the NFC transponder information (Timalsina, Bhusal, & Moh, 2012).

The last and least common NFC mode of operation is peer-to-peer mode, which enables two or more NFC devices to freely exchange information.  In the peer-to-peer mode, no device is set as a reader or a transponder and the devices are free to exchange data as desired.  Such modes allow for easy exchange of contacts, images, or other small data and information between NFC devices.

Security.  As commercial uses of RFID have grown, there is increasing concern over the security of RFID systems.  There is a distinct tradeoff between security and the efficiency of RFID and other identification systems.  RFID systems work between a transponder or tag and a scanner.  The transponder holds information that is used to identify the user.  Unfortunately, current transponders have little to no security, which means that the information could be read by any reader within close proximity to the transponder (Knospe & Pohl, 2004).

The security of RFID systems has been under scrutiny since the advent of the technology.  The wireless nature of RFID systems have enabled the security of such systems to be under constant threat of attack.  An attacker could potentially gain access to a wireless channel from any location (Yu, Yiu, & Hui, 2009).  Due to the clear security flaw of the system, RFID security has been continually improved (Rieback, Crispo, & Tanenbaum, 2006).  One aspect that has made the most progress is the improvements to the IFF.  The IFF allows RFID systems to identify attacks which is a huge step in averting such attacks (Rieback, Crispo, & Tanenbaum, 2006).  Through improvements to RFID security, experts have classified five unique types of attacks (Rieback, Crispo, & Tanenbaum, 2006).

The first of these attacks is classified as sniffing in which an attacker is eavesdropping on the wireless channel of a RFID system.  This causes privacy concerns especially when the information transferred over the channel includes user information as well as location.  Another type of attack is tracking.  Similar to sniffing, the attacker can eavesdrop on the channel and find the RFID tag location effectively locating the user.  The attacker can use this information to track users.  Spoofing is another type of attack in which the attacker creates a fake tag from a blank RFID tag.  This is then used to access information.  The last type of wireless attack is the replay attack.  The replay attacker intercepts RFID signals and then retransmits the signal.  This type of attack could be used to relay false information or to steal other tag information wirelessly.  These four type of attacks show the importance of user information in RFID systems and non-physical flaws in RFID systems (Rieback, Crispo, & Tanenbaum, 2006).

In addition to wireless attacks, RFID systems are also prone to physical attacks.  The attacker can physically remove the RFID tag from the object or place the object in a booster bag that can block the RFID scanner.  The attacker could also place RFID tags onto other objects and overload the system with more data than it can take (Rieback).  Once again, this attack would be undertaken with the intent of stealing sensitive user information stored in the RFID system (Rieback, Crispo, & Tanenbaum, 2006).

Thus, the core of the problem for RFID systems lies in the RFID tags that are used to hold user information.  With much of the information unprotected, user privacy becomes a vital issue when considering the use of RFID.  The simple solution to the problem would be to build innate security onto the RFID tags; however, the tradeoff between security and the cost of individual tags would be too substantial (Knospe & Pohl, 2004).  Another solution would be to diminish the proximity at which the reader can scan RFID tags.  The fatal flaw of this solution is that it only reduces the range of an attack.  If an attacker were to get within the small range the system would be vulnerable.

Taking everything into account, one effective security measure would be to enhance the security of the RFID tag by encrypting the information stored on the tag.  The encryption must be useable on low cost RFID tags with limited computing in order to be effective with commercial RFID tags (Israsena, 2006).  One proposed encryption would be to use the Tiny Encryption Algorithm (TEA) to ensure low cost but efficient protection of user information (Israsena, 2006).  TEA only uses bitwise logic commands (XOR, AND, OR and SHIFT operations), which require less hardware components than other algorithms that use more complex operations (Israsena, 2006).  Luckily, there are commercially available RFID tags that have innate encryption.  The Mifare cards offer triple Data Encryption Standard (3DES) for the Ultralight C series, and Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) for the Mifare Plus card.

The difference between the triple Data Encryption Standard and the Advanced Encryption is that AES outperforms 3DES in terms of software and hardware.  The 3DES standard is an improvement over the original DES, which is now considered obsolete.  The original DES uses a 56-bit key size, which is too small, being able to be broken by brute force attacks.  A brute force attack is when an attacker attempts to break the encryption by using every single combination possible.  The 3DES remedies the fatal flaw simply by using 3 separate keys thus achieving the maximum security of a 168-bit key size.  Overall, the cypher of the system would stay the same so any system that utilized DES is compatible with 3DES.

AES is an overall improvement over the DES system.  It is based on a completely new cipher using different key sizes, and blocks.  Standard block size for AES is currently 128 bits, using three different key sizes: 128-bit, 192-bit, and 256-bit.  As the best current encryption standard, AES is the U.S.  Federal government standard.  All in all, AES also offers more protection and works faster in small devices due to longer keys and larger block sizes (Alanazi et al., 2010).  In the commercial market, privacy and security of consumer information are vital.  The effective tradeoff of security and cost for RFID systems is still being considered and researched.

Power.  When RFID modules are viewed as conventional digital systems, then the tradeoffs in terms of power requirements will be very simple when deciding on the operating specifications of the chip.  Generally, power consumption of a digital system can be simply calculated as P = CV 2f, where P is the system power consumption; C is the load capacitance of [the] system; V is the voltage of the system; f is the system frequency.  In principle, “low voltage, low frequency and low capacitance are chosen at the basis of not affecting the system performance” (Shu-qin, Jin-hui, Lei, li-gang, & Wu-chen, 2008).  However, problems begin to arise because the properties of RFID systems vary widely as the frequency, voltage, and capacitance change.  For instance, RFID tags and readers are categorized by their operating frequency as low frequency (125 kHz), high frequency (13.56 MHz), ultra-high frequency (850-900 MHz), or microwave (>2.4 GHz) (Journal, 2002).  Furthermore, RFID tags are categorized as passive, semi-passive, or active depending on the power scheme used (Weis, 2007).  The table below summarizes the specific uses of each configuration of RFID system.


| **Tag Type** | Passive | Semi-Passive | Active |
|---|---|---|---|
|  **Power** | Harvesting RF Energy  |  Battery |  Battery |
|  **Max Range** | 10 M  |  > 100 M |  > 100 M |
| **Relative Cost**  | Least Expensive  | More Expensive  | Most Expensive  |
|  **Example Applications** |  EPC, Proximity Cards |  Electronic Tolls, Pallet Tracking |  Large-asset, Livestock Tracking |

<figcaption>Figure 6.  Table comparing types of RFID tag and its applications.</figcaption>

As noted in Figure 6 above, passive tags enable access control applications such as ticketing and point of sale use.  The basic RF-interface in the chips inside of the passive tags has several different elements including: a modulator/demodulator, a rectifier, clock regenerator, power on reset, and voltage regulator (NXP Semiconductors, 2007).  Designs such as these only date back to 2002 when the low voltage/low power circuits necessary to achieve this were created (Villard et al., 2002).  Since then, these designs have been refined to improve tag performance and decrease cost.  Though a passive tag does not require any constant source of power, there are lower limits on the power the reader must transmit in order to communicate with the tag.  This requirement is based on the sensitivity of the modulator/rectifier circuit within the tag.  Modulator circuits that perform more effectively, coupled with efficient sense amplifiers, reduce the magnitude of the magnetic field required to trigger a response from the passive card to a reader’s query (Chawla & Ha, 2007).

The issue of power versus performance in RFID systems has been well documented from the perspective of not only the tag (i.e. Passive versus active tags), but of the reader.  Xu et al pointed out that handheld RFID readers have become very popular, but have challenging power limitations because of their portability (Xu, Gu, Wang, & Xing, 2010).  If mobile readers have a high power draw, they will quickly deplete their battery source, which must be relatively small given the compact nature of the device.  Conversely, low powered readers have a very limited range (Xu, Gu, Wang, Xing, 2010) since the power of a magnetic field of a dipole falls off as  in the near field (Chawla & Ha, 2007).  Consider an average RFID reader such as the TRF7960/61 by Texas Instruments.  The reader has a minimum voltage requirement of 2.7 V and draws 10mA of current (the total power requirement is approximately 30 mW), with an output power between 100 mW and 200 mW (Texas Instruments, 2016).  As a small, fully integrated circuit, the TRF7960/61 operates very efficiently with energy saving protocols such as only drawing significant current when in the process of reading a tag.  Though, one must remember that this is only the RFID reader circuit of the system as a whole.  To actively use the output of an RFID reader, the reader circuit is connected to a processor.  According to the manufacture specifications, the power requirements for the processor range from less than 2 V for a microprocessor and up to 12 V for a fully programmable RFID reader.  This presents significant challenges when balancing the true power consumption of an RFID system with the required functionality and reliability of the device.

There are many ways to power an RFID system, but the team has chosen to study three specific options for powering the RFID reader and processor.  Bicycle dynamos, solar panels, and rechargeable batteries are low cost, simple solutions to the challenge of powering an RFID circuit attached to a bicycle.  Ultimately, the best solution may be a combination of these components.  Rechargeable batteries provide a steady source of voltage and available current that could be fueled by the bicycle dynamos and/or solar panels.  However, for the purpose of the literature review, these three options will be reviewed independently to better reveal their merits and challenges.

While bicycle dynamo generators have proven their use for decades as means of powering headlights and more recently as a source of electricity for rechargeable devices, they have several drawbacks that make their use impractical for a stationless bikeshare system.  The basic operation of a bicycle dynamo (be it hub or side wall) is to turn a permanent magnet through coils of wires, thus creating an alternating magnetic field and generating current as a result of Faraday’s law.  With correct impedance matching, typical bicycle dynamos can generate up to 6 W of power as the user pedals the bicycle at a steady pace (Krygowski & Slanina, 2000), but this comes at the cost of approximately 10% additional metabolic effort by the biker (Langenfeld et al., 2002).  One must also consider that by definition the previous power generation only takes place when the bicycle is in motion and the user will only access the RFID system when the bicycle is stationary.  That said, commercial devices are available for charging batteries with the excess power generated while in motion, but they can be costly (Cycling About, 2012).  The cost of bicycle dynamos varies based on the type of dynamo, and it can be fairly expensive even without an associated battery.  Hub generators are normally more expensive, with typical prices ranging from $60 to $250, while sidewall generators typically range between $30 and $100.

Another alternative that can be low cost is the use of small solar panels to provide sustainably generated power.  Portable, commercially available solar cells online generally provide a range of voltages from 3 to 18 V with current generally less than 100 mA.  While these panels are normally inexpensive, they do not include practical circuits for regulating the output voltages.  Another challenge for individuals seeking to use such products is that all reported voltages are maximum values.  The current vs. voltage output of photovoltaics varies significantly depending upon available sunlight (W. University, 2015).  This makes it difficult for individuals without access to reliable solar testing equipment to characterize the behavior of the panels.  For instance, one could construct a basic circuit for charging a battery with a solar cell, but to efficiently power an entire system, a full understanding of the interactions among the solar cell, the battery and the circuit being powered is required, and must be incorporated in the initial battery aware design (Raghunathan, Kansal, Hsu, Friedman, & Srivastava, 2005).

Rechargeable batteries provide a convenient and sustainable source of power for portable applications because the mAh to weight ratio of modern rechargeables is fairly high.  Additionally, if charged properly, battery lifetimes can extend up to 500 cycles of charging and discharging (B. University, 2013b).  Lithium-ion batteries provide the highest mAh to weight ratio of commercially available batteries, but they are limited by their stringent charging requirements (B. University, 2013a).  However, because of the potential that lithium-ion batteries hold for effectively powering a portable RFID system, they will be discussed here in greater detail to better describe how one might take advantage of their properties.

First of all, to charge a lithium-ion battery, current is forced into the battery until a predetermined voltage is reached, and then the voltage must be held steady at that point to charge the battery (Instruments, 2011).  The challenge with this charging scheme is that the margin of error for the constant voltage level is very small.  For instance, many lithium-ion batteries must be charged at 4.2 V, +/- 50 mV (Simpson, 2011).  An advantage, however, is that the initial current used to force the battery to 4.2 V can be extremely low over a long period of time (Simpson, 2011).  The overall charging time will vary based upon the size of the battery, but there is some freedom to create a low power, slowly charging circuit for the battery using a variable power source such as a solar panel or bicycle dynamo.  That being said, it is of utmost importance that users of lithium-ion batteries charge them correctly, or damage to the battery may ensue.

It is important to note that batteries of any kind can overheat and damage themselves or the components situated close to them.  Lithium-ion batteries are particularly susceptible to overheating (Bro & Levy, 2013).  The process of battery damage can begin at as low as 69°C (156°F).  The problem is that the reaction that ensues is exothermic, which further exacerbates thermal runaway (Wang et al., 2012), defined by IEEE as “a condition that is caused by a battery charging current that produces more internal heat than the battery can dissipate {Wang, 2012, Thermal runaway caused fire and explosion of lithium ion battery}(Wang et al., 2012).”  In general, thermal runaway in batteries is typically caused by the misuse of the battery rather than extreme temperatures (Bro & Levy, 2013).  This could occur because of high discharge rates, short circuits, or overcharging (Bro & Levy, 2013).  High discharge rates are primarily a concern when using lithium-ion batteries that have the ability to discharge large currents.  Realistically, most conventional batteries cannot achieve a discharge rate high enough to trigger thermal runaway at room temperature (Bro & Levy, 2013).  Lithium ion batteries, which have much lower effective heat capacities than typical electrolyte batteries (Bro & Levy, 2013), are particularly susceptible to thermal runaway when short circuited to a near-zero impedance.  In this case, a short circuit refers to any connection that bridges the terminal of the battery with a very low resistance and is generally caused by damage to the battery.  Finally, overcharging of batteries is particularly a problem with regards to lithium-ion because they lack the chemical recombination mechanism that prevents heat generation in aqueous electrolyte batteries.  Also, overcharging causes irreversible oxidation reactions at the positive electrode.

The Literature Review of popular methods for wireless communication proved to be quite beneficial.  The existing literature provided clear applications for each of the researched communication methods, clearly outlining its strengths and shortcomings.  The literature guided further considerations in access control in moving forward with development.
