## Current State of Bikeshares

Bikeshare systems can be sorted into three different categories: community sharing, manual, and automatic systems.  Each system has unique features, but they all try to accomplish the same goal: to create a bikesharing system that can be used by various members of the community.

**Community bikeshares.**  Community bicycle shares (CBS) are run on a trust-based system.  Using public funds, bicycles are placed around a community where anyone is able to borrow a bike and return it to a new location.  The bikes may be purchased second hand, donated, or entirely custom with distinct markings that clearly distinguish CBS bikes from privately owned bikes.  These systems come in various forms, as they tend to crop up in small communities, campuses, and other areas to which a small system would cater.  The bikes are free to be used by anyone in the community, and users generally do not encounter any fees for participation.  These programs have the lowest start-up cost and are the best for small communities to encourage tourism and weekend leisure use (dell'Olio, Ibeas, & Moura, 2011).

Although it can be inexpensive to gather a collection of second hand bicycles, community bicycle shares often struggle with the large investment in bicycle repair, unpredictable maintenance, and inability to locate bikes in the system.  Since these programs are generally available to the public at no cost, replacing missing bikes and performing repairs hinders the fiscal ability of these programs to continue operation.  As David Mozer notes: “[CBS’s] proved hard to sustain because users didn't return the bicycle to public places or because of heavy use, or simple abuse, the fleet dwindled because it was hard to keep the bicycles maintained.” As a result of these problems, bikeshares began to develop solutions that would address these major flaws (Mozer, 2016).

**Manual bikeshares.**  As a result of all the problems that community bicycle shares faced, bikeshare programs began to move towards the manual bikeshare model.  These bikeshares are based around a library model, where one can rent a bike out for a certain amount of time.  These systems have bicycle points near or in tourist buildings, libraries, and other public buildings.  Users must identify themselves to the staff at these buildings and will then receive a bicycle to use for the day.  Many times, these types of bikeshares are free and used to promote bicycle use in towns (dell’Olio, Ibeas, & Moura, 2011).  These systems are better suited for small or medium sized towns where an automatic bikeshare would be cost prohibitive due to low demand.  Having the ability to rent also means that the fleet of bikes can be properly maintained as well as easily located since users of the system need to sign bikes out for use.

**Automatic bikeshares.**  For high demand cities, automatic systems feature bicycle points throughout a city that are accessed by a user’s card or mobile phone rather than an attendant.  There are annual or weekly service charges or alternatively, pay per 30 minutes schemes, which have penalty charges if the bicycle is returned late.  The most cost extensive bikeshare systems to maintain are in Washington, D.C, Paris, and Barcelona and are operated automatically (Kurtzleben, 2012).  Automatic systems are better suited for large metropolitan areas and college campuses where the potential user demand is greater.

Although bikeshares have proved to be successful in large cities, there is a surprisingly limited amount of research data available on creating a bikeshare specifically for college campuses.  Existing studies indicate that college communities were generally more accepting of biking and other non-motorized transport compared to other settings (Balsas, 2003).  College students were more conscious of the environment and tended not to have access to personal motor vehicles due to cost and limited parking (Balsas, 2003).  Therefore, walking and biking provided green, reliable alternatives that are much more campus friendly.  Extensive pedestrian infrastructure allowed for easy walking across campuses, but campus roads allowed bikers to travel quickly and safely.  Active biking and strong bicycle law enforcement created a safer, more effective environment for bicycle users on and off campus (Balsas, 2003).

**_Capital Bikeshare and Velib._**  Various cities employ different bikeshare systems depending on the demand, population density, geographical features, and bicycle infrastructure (Cervero & Duncan, 2003).  As a case study, consider the closest bikeshare to College Park: Capital Bikeshare based in Washington, D.C., with service in Alexandria, Virginia; Arlington County, Virginia; and Montgomery County, Maryland.  In 2014, the sponsored program had 1,650 bicycles and 175 stations servicing 22,000 subscribing members.  Bicycles can be returned to different stations giving patrons the freedom to travel to various destinations with either two-way or one-way travel.  Capital Bikeshare participants also use the bicycles for a variety of reasons.  Fifty-eight percent of respondents who are subscribers said they use Capital Bikeshare for commuting, while seventy percent said that they use the service for social activities and errand runs (Bikeshare, 2013).

Capital Bikeshare uses a payment system with four options: pay-per-ride, three-day rental, or a monthly or yearly subscription.  The fee for one-time use is $8, a three-day pass is $17, a monthly subscription is $28, and yearly subscriptions are $85.  The first 30 minutes of a paid subscription are free, but any riding time after the 30 minutes is an additional charge.  The bicycles have three speeds, equipped with adjustable seats, and both a front and rear LED light, as per bicycle law (Md. TRANSPORTATION Code Ann. § 21-101, 2016).  Once finished riding, the user returns the bicycle to a designated station.  The stations vary in size and are powered via solar panels (Bikeshare, 2013).

The Velib bikeshare system in Paris is the largest in the world, but it is plagued with high levels of theft and vandalism (Maynard, 2013).  Velib bicycles are not anchored when locked and can be easily stolen or tossed in the River Seine.  Some bicycles have even been shipped off to northern Africa to sell the parts on the black market (Kazis, 2010).  Other bikeshare systems have different, more reliable locking mechanisms that reduce theft, making bicycle replacement costs negligible.  For example, during the first two years of operation, Capital Bikeshare has only lost five out of 1,100 bicycles (Kazis, 2010).  Capital Bikeshare uses several tactics that lead to their low rate of bicycle theft.  The aesthetics of their bicycles are not especially desirable, and they are most clearly from Capital Bikeshare.  The parts in the bicycles are also custom made and unique.  They also require special tools to disassemble, which discourages thieves from taking apart the bicycles to sell individual parts (DeMaio & Gifford, 2004).  The potential demand of the users for any bikeshare system will decrease if the locking mechanism is not reliable (dell’Olio, Ibeas, & Moura, 2011).  Since bike replacements including all associated costs can range in the $1,000s, it is important for both riders and operators alike to have good security measures to avoid such strenuous costs.  Bikeshares also face logistical challenges such as the constraints of bicycle docking.  For instance, Capital Bikeshare subscribers often have to search for an available bike or an empty spot on a dock.  Due to the uneven distribution of bicycles, some stations may be completely empty while others will be full and unable to accept additional bikes.  Capital Bikeshare operates six vans that move approximately 1,000 bicycles around each night to fix the problem of disproportionate quantities of bicycles at each station (Chavez, 2013).  With a system that eliminates docking stations, students are free to leave a bicycle at any location.  Returned bicycles would not have to funnel down to one individual location.  Rather, students could leave the bicycle almost anywhere on campus.

However, there is still the very likely issue that students will ride downhill from the residence halls, leave the bicycles at the classroom building, and walk back to their residence halls, a common issue identified in other bikeshares.  An example of how current bikeshares combat this problem is demonstrated by the Velib program that offers users a free extra fifteen minutes of bicycle use if they return bicycles to stations located on top of hills (Vogel, Greiser, & Mattfeld, 2011).

**_College bikeshares._**  Some college campuses have already installed bikeshares.  For example, Washington State University in Pullman installed $140,000 automated bikeshare system where students could swipe their university ID card to unlock a bicycle from a station (Tang, 2010).  Using the pre-existing infrastructure of student swipes, on which students already rely for everything from housing to food, the bikeshare was tailored to student life.  These systems are challenged by short-distance student needs where docks are difficult to incorporate.  Student use peaks between classes when students are most likely to borrow a bike to travel to the next class building.
