## Geolocation

In order to support a campus-wide stationless bikeshare, Team BIKES recognizes the need for a robust geolocation system.  The purpose of the system is to provide ease of access to the bikeshare for users and system administrators alike.  At a minimum, it must provide a way to measure, store, and communicate positional, usage, and maintenance data for all of the bikes that belong to the bikeshare.  Over the duration of the project, Team BIKES has thoroughly researched various existing technologies for designing and building the geolocation system, prioritizing options that offer the best mix of affordability, scalability, and reliability.

The literature review for the geolocation system consists of two parts: a survey of feasible implementations for the hardware infrastructure and a survey of best practices for developing the mobile application.

Hardware.  One example of a competing bikeshare design is BitLock, a start-up company that created a smartphone-controlled “smartlock” (Bitlock, 2015).  With BitLock, users must pair their smartphone using BlueTooth with their U-lock, and then they can unlock the lock wirelessly as long as they have their paired smartphone on hand.  The smartlock not only responds to users’ requests to lock or unlock, but also can track the location of the bike along with other metrics.  The smartphone can then send this information to a database through the cellphone’s cellular or Wi-Fi connection, allowing system administrators to keep track of the bikes in real time (Costa, 2015).  Integrating BitLock’s concept in a bikeshare is innovative but conceptually straightforward.  The team would obtain and program a Bluetooth module, such as a RN42-XV Bluetooth Module, that is approximately $25 per unit (Sparkfun Electronics, n.d. - a).  Since Bluetooth is well-researched and supported by a wide selection of documentation, it brings ease of development to those inexperienced with its technology.  Once the Bluetooth module is configured to send and receive relevant signals, the team can mount the module on the bike, which then can be replicated for every bike in the bikeshare.  Finally, the team can develop a basic smartphone application to interface the smartphone with the Bluetooth modules and the Internet.

Although promising, the previously mentioned Bluetooth-smartphone approach has a serious disadvantage in the context of a campus bikeshare.  Obtaining information on the bikes’ status (position, usage, etc.) would rely on the user pairing a smartphone with GPS and Bluetooth capabilities as well as an active subscription to mobile Internet.  While it may be possible to leverage campus-wide Wi-Fi networks, many are designed for high populous areas and may have poor to no coverage at critical bike rack locations.  Though highly prevalent among the intended user base of on-campus students and faculty, smartphones are far from universal; it is not reasonable to exclude those who do not own a smartphone from using the bikeshare.

In order to develop a more inclusive system that can remotely monitor and locate bikes within a bikeshare without user intervention, Team BIKES considered implementing a global system for mobile communication (GSM) and general packet radio service (GPRS) based system in combination with a Bluetooth module.  The bike lock would effectively emulate a basic smartphone.  While this would eliminate the need for the user to own a smartphone, this would incur a substantial subscription fee of up to $40 per month per bike and would represent a major financial burden on a large-scale bikeshare (Consumer Reports, 2016).  Given these considerations, the team decided to move in a different direction by looking into ways to preserve the benefits of the Bluetooth-smartphone approach while addressing its drawbacks.

To create a feasible bikeshare that is more cost effective than a GSM/GPRS-based system, Team BIKES set out to design a small-scale cell system.  This can be accomplished by a customized RF-Wi-Fi mesh network, which operates by transmitting data between bikes and users through a number of specialized routing stations.  The routing stations, functionally analogous to cell towers, serve as bridges that connect on-bike electronics to the web.  They are usually installed in buildings for easy access to power and Internet connectivity, and depending on the hardware used, they can each theoretically cover a radius of up to several miles.  The number of routing stations depends on the coverage that the bikeshare intends to achieve.  Building the customized RF-Wi-Fi mesh network requires a high upfront cost of around $130 per bike/station, estimations based on price breakdown discussed later.  However, by eliminating the monthly subscription fee, the RF-Wi-Fi mesh network proves more affordable than the aforementioned GSM/GPRS configuration.

Unfortunately, implementing this system is technically challenging.  In order to simultaneously handle the large number of bikes that will be communicating with the network, a robust communication protocol must be in place (Masri, Khoukhi, & Gaiti, 2011).  A widely recognized technique to accomplish this in similar real-time wireless mesh networks (RT-WMN) is Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) (Wei et al., 2013).  In a TDMA system, essentially all users are allocated small time slots where only that user can transmit or receive data over the RF medium.  Developing a custom TDMA technique with limited hardware would cause delays in the system due to a "poll-and-wait" strategy.  As the number of bikes in the system increases, the quality of service would plummet to a degree that would render this model infeasible in a real-time bikeshare.  A RT-WMN has potential as an effective communication system, but selecting a TDMA system could prove disastrous when attempting to scale the system beyond a proof of concept.

Overcoming the time slot limitation of TDMA, ZigBee is an alternative specification for small, low-power, and low-cost radios based on the IEEE 802.15.4 – 2003 Wireless Personal Area Networks standard (Thaku, 2012).  It can support wireless mesh networks that are analogous to the previously mentioned custom RF-Wi-Fi mesh network.  ZigBee mesh network consists of three classes of nodes: a “coordinator,” several “routers,” and any number of “end devices.” The coordinator is responsible for initializing the network, specifying the operating frequency channel of the network, and facilitating administrative tasks such as allowing other devices to join the network and connecting the mesh network to the Internet.  The multiple routers relay the messages from one node to another, regardless of the node’s type.  The end devices are installed on bikes in the form of low-power, battery-powered devices sending and receiving relevant messages through the network while interacting with other on-board electronics (NXP, 2014).  A prominent implementation of the ZigBee mesh network is based on using a series of low-power radio modules, branded XBee ZigBee (XBee ZB).  XBee ZB modules offer a wide variety of configurations, each featuring a specific operating frequency, range, power consumption, and data rate.  Out of all modules, Team BIKES determined that XBee-PRO ZB Series 2B, with the two mile maximum range and at $28.00 per unit, offered the best match to the needs of the bikeshare.  See Appendix B for an example configuration of ZigBee mesh network components.

Overall, ZigBee technology shows promise in the context of a stationless bikeshare, as it preserves the advantages of the custom RF-Wi-Fi mesh network, while circumventing the challenge of building a communication protocol from scratch.  It is well-documented in the online community, with a wide variety of tutorials, guides, and references available for new developers (Sparkfun Electronics. n.d. - b).

Software.  Every software developer faces similar challenges to address major revisions, modify permissions, transmit data, and support multiple platforms.  Traditionally, for an application to be available on multiple devices, the developer would create the same application in multiple coding languages.  Each time an application was updated, a developer would repeat the changes across each platform and introduce platform-specific modifications (Cardoso, Hepp, & Lytras, 2008).  Since a company needs to support a number of devices, redundant codebases are often too expensive for startups to maintain.  To transcend these problems, future companies can leverage code written and tested by a large user base.  A startup can reduce development time and cost by incorporating general code rather than custom-built code.  There are several emerging web technology frameworks that simplify the incorporation and sharing of general code.  Additionally, some frameworks can support multiple devices, store and exchange data, and ensure user security among other features.

A few of the main frameworks used are discussed including Ruby on Rails, MEAN.io (MongoDB, Ember, Angular, and Node), and Meteor.  Ruby on rails is a complex framework that offers a high level of control over development.  The software has been around for 7-8 years and has matured with a large number of blog posts, answered support questions, and well documented tutorials (Tate & Hibbs, 2006).  MEAN.io is a newer framework that has risen in popularity and is around 5-6 years old.  The framework is a collection of smaller frameworks that are added to a core Node.js application.  Node.js supports and runs each component of the app and is the most minimal part of a web application.  On top of Node.js, the first component of MEAN.io is MongoDB, a highly flexible database for the application back-end.  The second component, Express.js, is a framework to manipulate the user-interface.  The third component is Angular.js which manipulates the web page content, such as text, links, or images.  Along with the MEAN stack, Node offers a very extensive package framework and is not necessarily limited to a MEAN-only web application (Linnovate, 2015).  However, Meteor is the newest framework in the group.  Meteor is built on Node.js, but includes significantly more standard features.  Meteor has its own package system and has quickly absorbed many of the Node packages.  The software is straightforward to learn and uses JavaScript for every logic-based action (Strack, 2012).

These frameworks change the way development occurs.  For multidisciplinary teams of designers, developers, and engineers, development is faster and more affordable.  More time can be allocated to consider user feedback and make software improvements.  While each framework has certain benefits and drawbacks, Meteor remains a forerunner for development.  With a growing user community and an officially supported package management system, Meteor maintains optimal client to server communications and easy extensibility.  Additionally, in light of many proven case studies that have highlighted the crucial role of mobile applications in the growth and retention of a business’s user base, Meteor proved applicable as a foundation for effective development (Cardoso, Hepp, & Lytras, 2008; Gaziulusoy & Twomey, 2014; Schwartz, 2015).
