# Security and Locking

Modern bikeshare programs rely on powered docking stations to store bicycles when not in use (Midgley, 2011).  However, these stations are expensive, time consuming, and the power requirements limit where they can be placed (DeMaio, 2009).  Although these stations do keep bikes as secure as possible, their limited placement and mobility hampers the usefulness of these bikeshares.  Since rented bicycles must be borrowed from and returned to these stations, there is always the risk that there will not be a bicycle available for use or the station is already full.  Both cases cause serious problems for people on a tight schedule, such as commuters who are most likely to use bikeshares consistently, which will result in negative feedback of the systems.

An alternative to station-based bikeshares is to use smartlocks that allow for a stationless system (Rzepecki, 2010).  Current concepts such as Bitlock and Lock8 may soon be on the market.  Both are wireless bicycle locks with keyless locking and unlocking as well as location tracking.  They offer Bluetooth connection, Global Positioning System (GPS) location retrieval with a smartphone, and backup entry in the event a user’s phone runs out of battery (Bitlock, 2015; Velolock Germany, 2015).  Lock8 also has an alarm that sounds if its sensors indicate possible theft.  Each lock design, however, still has its shortcomings.  Bluetooth is readily hackable with today’s technology, and individual components of bicycles can still be removed and stolen (Kumar, 2013).  Bitlock boasts the potential to make a bikeshare, but has not been implemented yet as such.  Recently, Lock8 has pivoted from directly selling a smartlock to customers to managing a bikeshare service after substantially revamping their original product and refunding most of their Kickstarter backers (Velolock Germany, 2015).  At the time of writing, Lock8 had not yet launched a bikeshare service.

Bikeshare systems past and present have easily distinguishable bicycles to deter would-be thieves from being able to easily turn a bicycle for a profit.  Clearly marking bicycles to indicate that they belong to a city bikeshare system reduces the incentive to steal from the bikeshare, as it poses a greater risk for those with ill intentions.  Easily distinguishable bicycles are also more convenient to locate when trying to borrow.  In addition, the theft of individual bicycle parts is a significant issue that is affecting current bikeshares.  Screwdrivers, wrenches, and Allen keys are commonly used to steal bicycle parts (Van Lierop, Grimsrud, & El-Geneidy, 2015).  In order to combat this widespread problem, bikeshares, such as Citibike in New York, use parts that require special proprietary tools to disassemble (Allyn, 2013).  To prevent general misuse and theft, some systems use disabling methods such as automatic wheel locks.  GPS tracking allows these bicycles to be recovered or tracked if they are being moved far out of the city (DeMaio, 2009).

One of the biggest challenges when attempting to deal with the more user-friendly stationless bikeshare is determining the safest and most effective lock type.  Bicycle theft criminals are rarely caught, so prevention is key, especially with an expensive bikeshare system (Johnson, Sidebottom, & Thorpe, 2008).  There are many common techniques for breaking bicycle locks, so a combination of different types of locks, or an extra-strengthened type of lock will be needed to ensure that the bicycles in a stationless system are still secured and accessible (Van Lierop, Grimsrud, & El-Geneidy, 2015).

Locking mechanisms.  In order to create a lock for a stationless bikeshare, it is important to understand the history and development of locking technology meant to deter potential thieves.  Lock experts’ design choices, driven by thieves’ attack methods, give insight into the advantages and disadvantages of past products.  The team can learn from these past designs and use this understanding to improve on current locks.  In this subsection, the Locking subteam goes into detail about past and present locks on the market in order to develop design considerations for the team’s smartlock.

Before the development of locks specifically for bicycles, bikers secured their bikes using lengths of chain connected by padlocks.  This chain and padlock combination could easily be cut using bolt cutters.  In 1972, Kryptonite introduced the U-lock, offering a marked advantage over previous bicycle locking methods.  Their U-locks were heavier and thicker than typical chains, making them more resistant to bolt cutters (Welch, 2013).  Kryptonite’s first U-lock was made of iron, featuring a flat U-shaped shackle through which a flat crossbar could be inserted and locked in place with a padlock.  The lock also included a socket to cover the padlock and protect it from bolt cutters (Kaplan, 1974), as displayed in Figure 3 below.

Figure 3.  Image from Kryptonite’s original U-lock patent.  Depicts the complete system, with the crossbar 14 fitting into the u-shaped shackle 12 and being secured by a padlock 16.  In Fig.  3, the socket is more clearly represented 34, 36, and 38 as a protective casing for the padlock (Kaplan, 1974).

The brand Kryptonite gained recognition when a New York bike shop used Kryptonite’s U-lock to secure a bike to a parking meter outside the shop.  After a month, the wheels and seat were gone but the bike’s frame was still locked to the meter.  Further advertising and design iteration established Kryptonite in the bike locking industry.  Kryptonite learned from thieves’ methods and improved their lock, thickening and rounding out the previously flat shackle and crossbar, changing the material to hardened steel, and moving the key to the center of the shackle (Welch, 2013).

Kryptonite’s next lock design, the K4 lock, boasted ease-of-use by allowing the user to insert the U-shaped shackle into the crossbar rather than threading the crossbar through the shackle.  First made in 1978, the K4 U-lock featured a “bent-foot,” which represented another important change in U-lock design.  As can be seen in Figure 4, the bent foot design allows the user to first slide one end of the shackle into the crossbar then the other end, rather than having to simultaneously thread both ends of the shackle into the crossbar (Smithsonian Institution, 2003).

Figure 4.  The patent for Kryptonite’s K4 U-lock.  Notice the bend 26 in the bottom portion of the shackle in patent Fig.  2.  The “bent foot” design allows the user to first slide in one end of the shackle, then the other, as demonstrated in patent Fig.  3 (Zane & Zane, 1979).

Kryptonite was sold to Ingersoll Rand (IR) in 2001, which led to a line of new, even stronger locks.  The standout Kryptonite product to this day is the Fahgettaboudit Mini (Howard, 2013; Lock, 2016; Welch, 2013).  The Fahgettaboudit Mini’s resiliency comes from its ability to resist thieves’ typical attacks on U-locks: angle grinders and levering with a jack or long pipe.  U-locks are made from thick bars of hardened steel designed to resist bolt cutters, which causes thieves to resort to these more involved methods of attack.  This is especially true of the Fahgettaboudit Mini, which has an 18mm thick shackle (Kryptonite).  If a thief can fit a modified car jack or bottle jack inside a U-lock, they can use the jack to force the lock apart.  Similarly, a long pipe can lever the lock apart if a thief inserts it through the U-lock.

The Kryptonite Fahgettaboudit Mini resists these types of attacks because of its small size.  With a width of 3.25 in and a height of 6 in, the Fahgettaboudit Mini is too small to insert a jack or pipe while properly locked around a bike rack and the bike (Kryptonite).  In order to break the Fahgettaboudit Mini, expert Hal Ruzal had to use an angle grinder to cut through it.  Another feature of this lock that makes it even more secure is that it secures both ends of the shackle when locked instead of just one.  When only one side is secured, a thief can cut a U-lock in one place and easily remove the unsecured end.  By securing both ends of the shackle to the crossbar, thieves have to make two cuts through the Fahgettaboudit in order to remove a portion of the lock and thereby remove the lock (Howard, 2013).

Ruzal tested a wide variety of locks when he tested the Fahgettaboudit.  He found that cable locks were all easily breakable with bolt cutters or wire cutters and said that they are only good for securing the front wheel of a bike when used in conjunction with another type of lock.  Like U-locks, chain locks have developed over the years to be stronger with more hardy locking components.  The best chain lock, according to Ruzal, was the OnGuard Mastiff 8020.  It resisted his angle grinder for almost three minutes before the angle grinder’s battery died.  The Mastiff 8020 features a 10 mm titanium reinforced square link steel chain, which is what gave it the strength to withstand Ruzal’s angle grinder (Howard, 2013; OnGuard).  In addition, it only weighs 2 lbs. to the Fahgettaboudit Mini’s 4.5 lbs. (Kryptonite; OnGuard).  The Mastiff 8020 is lighter than the Fahgettaboudit Mini, but both are incredibly strong locks that supply protection geared for tough environments.

An innovative new bike lock created by father and son Bob and John Laughlin, the TiGr lock, is the first lock to use all titanium (Welch, 2013).  The TiGr lock comes in a few different sizes, with the 1.25 in version being the strongest.  The TiGr lock is unique in its composition and in a number of its other features.  It is composed of a locking cylinder connected to a thin loop of titanium that looks similar to a stretched out belt.  Since it is made entirely of titanium, it is extremely light, with its heaviest variety weighing less than 2 lbs.  It is also flexible due to how thin it is, but still very hard to break.  The locking cylinder spins 360 degrees to allow the lock to rotate.  While the bike is in motion, the lock can be fixed to the top tube of the bike for convenient storage.  It comes in three sizes, the longest of which can lock both wheels and the bike frame to a rack (TiGr).

The TiGr lock performs respectably against attacks.  Since it rotates around the key cylinder, trying to lever the lock with a pipe only causes it to spin.  When the TiGr lock creators tested it against a car jack, the jack reached full extension without breaking the lock, a testament to the lock’s flexibility and strength (Welch, 2013).  However, Ruzal was able to sever it with an angle grinder in 17 seconds (Howard, 2013).  It does emit a loud shrieking noise under the angle grinder, which might be enough to draw a crowd and discourage thieves, note its creators (Welch, 2013).  The TiGr lock is portable, innovative, strong, and attractive.  However, it does not provide the same level of safety as the Fahgettaboudit Mini or the Mastiff 1020.

In addition to functionality, bikers weigh cost when choosing a bike lock (Lock, 2016).  The Fahgettaboudit Mini costs $110.  The OnGuard Mastiff 8020 costs slightly less, at $90 (Howard, 2013).  Of the three locks discussed in detail above, the TiGr is by far the most expensive.  The TiGr lock’s most secure model costs $199 (TiGr).  The amount of money a biker is willing to spend on a lock will depend on the environment and the value of the bike secured (Lock, 2016).

From this analysis of leading bike locks, the team compiled a list of critical qualities for a lock design and methods of achieving those goals.  Important qualities of a bike lock are resistance to cutting, resistance to leveraging by jack or pipe, resistance to grinders, weight, and cost.  Characteristics to consider when attempting to meet these goals include thickness, hardness, size, flexibility, and material.  The team will consider these characteristics in order to design the most effective bike lock design possible by maximizing resistance to cutting, leveraging, and grinding while minimizing weight and cost.

Developing a robust bike lock.  Acknowledging that thieves use various lock breaking techniques, bike lock companies employ layered protection to defend against a battery of attacks.  Bike lock companies conduct a variety of tests to make sure their locks can withstand these breaking techniques without compromising the security of the lock.  ABUS, a bike lock company, currently performs three major tests to check the performance of their bike locks: the freezing and smashing test, the twisting test, and the pulling test (Wolff-Mann, 2014).

The freezing and smashing test is used to emulate an extreme brute force attack.  This test emulates a thief using compressed substances such as liquid nitrogen or difluoroethane, a refrigerant, to freeze the lock and then smashing the brittle lock with a hammer (Gray, 2012).  The test procedure involves first chilling the lock to a temperature of -40 degrees Fahrenheit and then placing the lock into a unique hammer simulation machine.  The hammer simulation machine is an impact machine, similar to the apparatus for a charpy test that provides a sudden impulse to simulate a hammer blow (Wolff-Mann, 2014).  Next, the twisting test simulates a thief using a pry bar to twist and break open the lock.  This test involves a machine, similar to a torsion test machine, depicted in Figure 5, which allows the bike lock to be twisted in a controlled environment.  The machine has a stationary clamp on the bottom, causing the bottom of the bike lock to be fixed, and a horizontal bar that is looped through the upper region of the lock and twists against it (Wolff-Mann, 2014).  Finally, the third test utilized by ABUS is the pulling test.  This test is used to simulate a thief using a car jack, such as a bottle jack, to lever the lock and attempt to pull it apart.  The lock is first chilled in a similar fashion to the freezing and smashing test to recreate extreme environment conditions.  Then, the bike lock is put under tension through a series of fixtures attached to a universal testing machine (Wolff-Mann, 2014).

Figure 5.  Torsion test machine twisting metal rod.

Although ABUS uses this series of tests to evaluate its own bike locks, many other companies do not have an official standard of tests used for testing.  This is due to the difficult nature of emulating some actions, such as cutting a lock using a hacksaw, angle grinder, or bolt cutter, in a repeatable fashion.  As a result, bike lock companies, such as TiGr, test their bike locks by asking engineers to break the bike locks using tools and techniques that pertain to the method the bike lock company wishes to test (TiGr, 2016b).  Lending credence to these types of tests are independent organizations such as the ART Foundation in the Netherlands.  The ART Foundation sets standards for bike, moped, and motorcycle security (TiGr, 2016a).  They only certify bike locks that meet their standards, rating them out of 5 stars based on how well the lock performs in their tests.  They consider one or two stars sufficient for bicycles, with more stars required for moped or motorcycle locks (Stichting ART, 2015).

Lock manufacture.  Creating locks that can meet the stringent security testing takes a combination of machining methods.  The level of difficulty and the type of cut of the machining will vary what tool has to be used.  For smoothing a surface, tools include end mills and lathes.  For drilling holes, the most widely used tool is the drill bit.  All of the above machining operations can be done without a manual control using a Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machine.  Team BIKES used all of the aforementioned tools to machine their locks and fixtures.

End mills are used to cut materials in all directions, which is done by their spiral cutting edges called flutes (Company).  The number of spiral cutting edges can range from 2-6.  Two-flute end mills are used for efficient material removal through high chip ejection and four-flute end mills are used to improve surface finish and reduce ejected chip size (Melin Tool Company, n.d.).  Due to its ability to smooth surfaces, Team BIKES used the two and four flute end mills on the locks and fixtures.  Unlike end mills, which can cut material in all directions, drill bits are used to cut material axially.  The most common drill bit is the twist bit, which has spirals along the shaft to remove material as the front edge cuts the material (DIY Data, 2000).  In combination, these bits can create most necessary shapes and allow for the assembly of machined parts.

Lathes are commonly used for cutting, sanding and drilling.  They are most known for their process of turning, which is where a work part is rotated around its axis, as a cutting tool shears away unwanted material.  The cutting tools are held rigidly on a movable platform that can be moved by hand or power (Hoose, 2002).  In order to get a smooth surface on a rounded material, Team BIKES used a lathe because of its ability to cut material, while the work part is being rotated.

CNC machining is known for its high precision machining.  This process takes out all human operating error and allows a computer to operate the necessary tools.  To do this, the user must upload their m-code to the software package, which controls all of the operating conditions of the CNC machine (ThomasNet, 2015).  Team BIKES used the CNC machine to more accurately machine the lock due to the necessary precision that must go into constructing the lock.

There are many different methods of joining metals together.  Depending on whether temporary or permanent joints are needed, different techniques must be used.  For temporary joints, techniques include soldering, or using external pieces of software including rivets, nuts, bolts, or washers.  For permanent connections, which are what the team would require, the main technique is welding.

Welding joins two different metals together to make them function as one (Technology, 2004).  Welding methods include gas metal arc welding (GMAW), gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW), and flux-cored arc welding (FCAW).  GMAW welding is commonly used in high production manufacturing and construction (Society, 2016).  This method is used in a high variety of plate thicknesses.  Its advantages include its ease in starting and stopping and its high productivity (Weman, Lindén, & Institute of Materials, 2006).  The principle of GMAW welding is that a metallic wire is fed through the welding gun and melted in an arc.  A shielding gas protects the arc and pool of the molten material.  This shielding gas is commonly argon containing a small proportion of carbon dioxide or oxygen (Weman, Lindén, & Institute of Materials and Mining, 2006).  GMAW welding requires the least amount of training and is a good technique for beginners to use.

GTAW welding is mainly used when a high quality of weld is required (Modenesi, Apolinário, & Pereira, 2000).  This welding technique requires someone with experience in welding to perform.  FCAW welding is the most challenging and requires the most experience out of all the welding techniques described.  Welders need advanced training in welding with tubular wires.  There is a larger amount of molten material to control in this process, but if done correctly, productivity is very high (Weman, Lindén, & Institute of Materials and Mining, 2006).  After researching each welding method, the team determined that while all methods were of sufficient strength for the needs of the team's test fixture, GTAW was ultimately chosen due to its availability at the University of Maryland, its ease in starting and stopping, its high productivity, and its ease of use for beginners.
