# Research Background

As global industrialization and urbanization continues, lack of convenient transportation lingers as a challenge for many individuals.  When considering the escalating environmental and monetary costs of today’s most popular modes of transportation, commuters must strive to find viable alternatives.  Municipalities first officially implemented bikeshares in 1965 to combat the problem of rising costs of public transportation (Shaheen, Guzman, & Zhang, 2010).  Today, the typical bikeshare systems operate by using bike stations dispersed throughout the surrounding popular metropolitan destinations.  During an allotted time period, users can rent a bicycle from any station, use it for any number of pursuits - be it work, leisure, or tourism - and return the bicycle to any station (Bikeshare, 2013).  However, the number and distribution of stations can limit a user’s options for his or her final destination.  A metropolitan city with a large number of stations overcomes this drawback, but the problem still exists in smaller, though populous, areas such as college campuses.
In the United States, bikeshares are relatively new institutions, but a growing body of research indicates that bikeshares are successful in increasing community awareness of bikers, increasing bicycle usage, and by extension, reducing carbon emissions (Group, 2012).  Exceeding the trend of the past decade, in which many bikeshares emerged in densely populated areas around the world, bikeshares have begun to sprout up in small towns, suburban areas and university campuses.  Although the existing body of research concerning bikeshares on university campuses is rather limited, the University of California-Irvine’s experience operating Zotwheels, a university supported bikeshare, serves to illustrate the difficulties of implementing the current bikeshare model on a college campus (Fleming & Harris, 2010).
Zotwheels serves the UCI’s campus of 1,500 acres and approximately 30,000 students.  As reported by the University of California’s parking authority, Zotwheels has helped UCI to meet emissions reduction targets, and is a major part of the parking authority’s long term environmental vision for the university (Fleming & Harris, 2010).  The administrators of Zotwheels estimate that in the future, the bikeshare has the potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by over 30 metric tons per year (Fleming & Harris, 2010).  Presently, Zotwheels has 25 bicycles in operation and has reached up to 49 rentals per day (Fleming, Harris, & Davis, 2010).  While Zotwheels has had a positive effect on the University of California-Irvine campus, that effect has come at a tremendous cost.  The initial budget for the project was over a quarter of a million dollars, attributing roughly $200,000 towards installing the bicycle stations (Fleming, Harris, & Davis, 2010).  The resulting initial costs of over $10,000 for each bicycle in the bikeshare call into question the worth of the endeavor.  By discarding the conventional bikeshare model in favor of a stationless bikesharing system, ridership could be increased and overhead costs would be decreased while still preserving the benefits of the bikeshare.
