# Research Focus

Similar to the University of California-Irvine, the University of Maryland has sought out and planned for Capital Bikeshare, a bikeshare operating out of the nation’s capital and surrounding Virginia and Maryland suburbs.  The Diamondback, the university's independent, student operated newspaper, published a story in 2013 that discussed about the proposed bike station locations in campus.  The plan was due to be implemented by the Spring of 2014; however, these plans never came to fruition as the company that manufactures the bikes for Capital Bikeshare filed for bankruptcy.  Three years after the failed attempt to install Capital Bikeshare, UMD is currently continuing with new plans to install Zagster bikeshare in partnership with the city of College Park (Lang, 2016).  Team BIKES believes that the tendency of college students to use bicycles to make relatively short trips would have limited the usefulness of the planned traditional system.  Since trips may be so brief, students may find that it takes longer to return a bicycle to an inconveniently located station and then walk to class than it would take to walk to class instead of biking.  Furthermore, another limiting factor is the cost of stations, which restricts the number of bicycles that can be introduced into the system, thus hindering its functionality.  The overall result is that such a bikeshare would likely be unpopular with students if it were implemented.  Instead of docking stations, Team BIKES has planned and tested the possibility of creating a stationless bikeshare.  To replace the clunky and expensive stations, the team needed to develop three main components.  These components include: a way to track the location of the bikes, a way to securely lock the bikes, and a way for any user to unlock bikes in the system.  To replace the stationary docks, the team tested the feasibility of implementing a ZigBee network around campus by configuring XBee devices and conducting coverage tests.  This technology, similar to a wireless router, allows the tracking of any bike in the system as long as it remains on campus and is parked at a bike rack covered within the network.  The routers act as nodes in a wireless mesh network through which the locations of the bikes can be recorded in a central database and displayed on a phone or website application.  This front-end application has a multi-faceted purpose as it provides a central location where users can access their accounts and administrators can monitor usage rates, location, and maintenance needs.

With bicycle tracking under control, the team also needed to develop a secure bike lock.  The lock needs to meet and hopefully exceed the security standards of other consumer locks on the market.  The lock will securely lock and unlock, intelligently actuated from the onboard electronics.  It also needs to house a means of powering the electronic hardware and provide modest protection to the delicate components that would be used to both unlock and locate the bike.

As a means of having any user in the system be able to unlock a bike, the team needed to explore various wireless communication methods of radio frequency identification (RFID) technologies - including near field communication (NFC), and Bluetooth to allow any potential user access to bikes.  With a simple electronic authentication, the user can be off riding to their next class in no time.

Through the combination of security, location, and web application, Team BIKES has created a smartlock that can be fitted onto any bicycle, thus enabling a campus friendly bikeshare system.  The team also proposes guidelines for operations, terms of use, subscription cost and fees, both general and unique problems to a stationless bikeshare system, and potential ways in which to overcome these challenges.  With the goal of creating a bikeshare that better serves college students, Team BIKES has laid the framework for a system that is affordable, easily adaptable, and implementable on any university expressing an interest in bringing a bikeshare to its campus.  The team details its project from start to finish beginning with the literature review that documents the research into general bikeshares, locking materials and properties, RFID technologies, and the various means of locating and recording bike locations.  The team then documents the methods it took to develop and design the bikeshare.  Working through a variety of technical and logistic issues along the way, Team BIKES has created the bikeshare suitable for all college campuses.  Figure 1 summarizes the proof-of-concept of the proposed stationless bikeshare design integrating various components.

Figure 1.  Proposed proof-of-concept of a stationless bikeshare.
