## Thesis Organization

This thesis is organized based on the process Team BIKES followed for the product development of the smartlock and the bikeshare system.  The second chapter presents a literature review where the team collects past work done in regards to bikeshare systems as well as related technologies in the fields of bicycle locks, access control, and geolocation.  The third chapter transitions to the development process.  At the beginning of the development chapter, a discovery section first outlines the progression from deciding on technologies to exploring the capabilities of the selected technologies to experimenting to begin development while learning how all of the selected technologies function.  Following the discovery stage, an iteration period occurred where the team conducted a focus group to obtain feedback and gain more information regarding potential customer desires.  With a refined set of goals based off of the feedback received from the focus group discussion, the team entered an implementation period.  During this phase, the subteams independently conducted all the research and data collection needed for developing the components needed for their subsystems.  The fourth chapter then describes the integration period where all of the subteam components were compiled together in the form of compounding demonstrations of capabilities, followed by an overarching bikeshare design.  The thesis then wraps up with the fifth chapter’s conclusions outlining technological achievements, lessons learned, and future directions.
