## Bikeshare Design

Implementation of a successful bikeshare requires the integration of various parts such as a working communications network, functioning user interface, and other infrastructure among many others.  Any business hopes for a paying and enthusiastic user base to be successful, and a business centered on bikeshares is no different.  This section looks to explore why a college campus would want to implement a ZigBee connected smartlock-enabled bikeshare system.  Operational responsibilities of the campus will also be discussed as well as costs associated with system hardware and payment structure that any user would be subject to.  Additionally, this section will discuss and propose potential solutions to common problems associated with traditional bikeshares as well as problems specific to a stationless campus bikeshare.  Finally, the team looks at the total cost excluding operating costs to create the system.

Operations.  Upon implementation on the campus, the university will take on the responsibility for managing the operation of the system.  These responsibilities would include but not be limited to: maintaining an appropriately sized fleet of bicycles, maintaining user information, storing data collection if deemed necessary by the individual university, reporting theft and vandalism, supporting users, maintaining and expanding the ZigBee grid if there is demand for a larger coverage area on campus, and managing user access, payment collections, and fee scheduling.  Most practically, bikeshare operations would be delegated to the university’s transportation department.  Specifically for the University of Maryland, the prime responsibility of bikeshare operation would fall upon the Department of Transportation, under which BikeUMD currently operates under.

Payment structure.  In order to continue operations, the bikeshare would need to create consistent income from the subscription type service.  An example of the payment structure of Capital Bikeshare is shown in Figure 56.

Figure 56.  Membership and usage fees for users of Capital Bikeshare.

Due to the bikeshare’s target market and anticipated users, the payment structure needs to be favorable to a college student’s budget and schedule.  The challenge of the bikeshare system will be to charge enough money to operate with close to no net losses but not enough to discourage already cash-strapped college students.  This ideal pricing system will maximize the number of users on campus while satisfying the system’s monetary needs.  Furthermore, the structure and term of the subscription should be flexible enough to cater to the traditional semester college schedule.  Maryland’s Department of Transportation already offers parking via a semester-by-semester style, and this system would also work well for college students.

Students can subscribe to the system for a semester, month, week, or even a day-by-day basis and add money to their account when they need to once they have purchased the RFID card that gives them user-access to unlock bicycles.  The RFID card is the way that students will be able to unlock the bicycles.  In addition to students, visitors to the campus such as prospective students would be able to purchase time to ride around campus; thus they would be able to see more of the campus in less time that the time it takes to walk only a quarter of the campus.

In addition to cost, the bikeshare administrator can also determine how ride time is allotted in each subscription.  Two examples are the following.  One subscription type would allow riders to essentially use their subscription payment as a debit to use on the bikeshare.  Each ride would then deduct from their account based on the duration of the ride.  The amount would then be capped to either a daily or weekly limit, which would prevent abuse or monopolization of a single bicycle.  If a rider uses the allotted time that their subscription covers each day, they would be able to add money to their account through the website.

Another alternative is that users can have rides allotted so that a rider gets a certain number of rides per week.  The rider could space out their rides per week around their schedule.  Since the bikeshare is centered on a college campus, each ride should not take any longer than twenty to thirty minutes.

In the end, it would be up to the administrator to experiment with either method of subscription service.  Different college campuses may have students with different preferences, and for that reason the term structures should be open to the university and the above are merely suggestions rather than strict rules.

Fee structure.  In order to make sure that no one person can abuse the bikeshare by monopolizing a single bike for personal use, fees would be debited to the riders account when times go over the allotted amount credited to the account.  Other bikeshares have these fees set up around in thirty minute to hour-long increments.  To determine the best amount, more consumer outreach would need to be conducted.  However, as a rough estimate the fee should be set at $1.00 for every thirty minutes over time.  As an example of a traditional day, a student has a semester long package that grants unlimited rides per day where the cumulative length of those rides is less than 45 minutes.  If a rider takes one 45-minute ride or 45 one-minute rides, all of that is covered.  Once they pass 45 minutes per day, a $1.00 fee would be charged to their account and would show as an outstanding balance.

Fleet size.  Being operated in and around a college campus makes this type of bikeshare unique compared to other bikeshares in metropolitan cities.  Unlike large metropolitan cities, which need to maintain a near constant fleet size, a bikeshare targeted to students does not need to maintain a fixed fleet size.  Rather, it can adjust the size of the fleet based on student demand, which will fluctuate during the school year.  The administrator can cut back the size of the fleet during off cycle times such as summer when the majority of student are home on break and also during the winter months when the weather may impact the demand for biking.  One challenge will be wear to store the excess bikes during these times; however, by keeping the size down, the overall cost of maintaining the system lessens.

How to use.  First and foremost, the team is under the assumption that the potential rider is familiar with how to operate a bicycle safely, and while not required by law it is recommended to always wear a helmet or some other form of headgear.  After signing up for a subscription, students will be given a bikeshare unlock card.  This card may come in a couple forms.  It may come as a RFID sticker that can be placed on the student ID card administered by the school or the student may be given an RFID card similar to the metro fare cards used on the Washington, D.C.  Metro.

Once registered, the student can download the mobile application, which will highlight available bicycles, areas where bikes can be taken, and the enrollee’s subscription status, which features time available and/or rides available before fees are tacked accrued.  After locating the closest available bike and a destination, the rider need to unlock the bike to begin the ride.  After checking the bike for any visible signs of damage or wear, the user must press the start button located on the electronics box of the lock.  This button powers the system up from rest mode, which is used as a power saving measure.  Powering the lock on will activate the location feature and open the communication up with the central database.  The user will take their card and tap to unlock.  Maneuvering the lock off from the post and sliding the lock into the riding position, the bike is now in the hands of the user.  He or she is free to ride to the destination.  Once the system unlocks the bicycle, the ride has started, which means that the timer for the day officially begins.  This clock stops officially once the bike is properly locked at the conclusion of the ride.

Once the rider has gotten to the destined bike rack, they can begin to lock the bicycle.  Sliding the lock from the riding position back into the lock position, the user taps the RFID card again to open the lock and place it around the post of the bike rack.  Failure to properly lock the bike around the bike rack or within the coverage area, the timing clock will continue to roll.  If this is the case, a notification will be sent to the user’s phone giving them a warning about approaching the day’s allotted time.  This will serve as a reminder if locking was not completed properly.  After the user is finished and has locked the bike, the database changes the status back to available.  At this point, it becomes visible by all the other users when they open the bikeshare’s map.

Common bikeshare problems.  Almost all bikeshares, stationed or stationless, encounter common problems including the redistribution of bicycles after each day, the safety of the users, theft of the bicycles, and maintenance.  Capital Bikeshare and CitiBike face major problems with the unequal density of their bicycles, specifically at the end of a work day.  Users tend to bike to work and then take another form of transportation home, leaving many bikeshare bicycles in the city rather than in the suburbs where they were initially picked up, resulting in empty stations in areas where users would be picking up bicycles in the morning.  To combat this and prevent users from giving up on the bikeshare, companies use trucks to manually redistribute the bicycles to empty stations at night.  The safety of the users and of the bicycles are also integral in maintaining a working bikeshare.  This means ensuring that the bicycles are properly maintained, which will increase the safety of the riders.

Redistribution.  The bicycle density problem of Capital Bikeshare and other city bikeshares arises because of complex commuting patterns.  The commuting patterns of users are likely more simple because the bikeshare will be used almost solely for users to get across campus quickly, most likely to go to classes.  However, the team understands that users may not want to ride bicycles up inclines, so bikeshare bicycle density at hilltops such as Stamp Student Union may be lower than the bicycle density of the Chemistry building.  Bikeshare users will be incentivized and encouraged to move bicycles to hilltops or to other areas where bicycle density is low.  For example, if users redistribute bicycles to areas of low density, they can receive benefits such as a free ride or coupons from sponsors of the bikeshare.  If they wish to help in redistribution, users may receive push notifications on the mobile application with instructions on where to ride the bicycle to.  Once the redistribution act is complete and confirmed, the user will receive the benefit.  Naturally, this solution can only be implemented after it is clear where the areas of low bicycle density are on campus and at what times.

Safety.  Another issue that could arise with the system is inevitably the safety of the users while riding the team’s bikeshare bicycles.  Accidents could occur with the user while riding bikeshare bicycles which could include other parties.  To minimize these occurrences, users will be required to sign a member agreement and liability waiver prior to their use of the bikeshare.  Terms outlined in the waiver will follow Capital Bikeshare’s liability waiver and release.  The waiver will state that users release any claims they may have against the bikeshare including but not limited to claims, injuries, demands, liabilities, disputes, damages and losses associated with the bikeshare.  Essentially, the bikeshare cannot be held responsible for any losses, damages, or injuries that occur when the user is operating a bikeshare bicycle, including those for the other party of an accident.  However, because the safety of the bikeshare users is key, when they sign up for the system, they will be encouraged to practice safe bicycling such as wearing helmets and avoiding using cell phones or bicycling in extreme weather.

In addition to user safety, the safety of bystanders such as pedestrians and automobile drivers was considered.  The user would be required to sign a waiver that state that her or she will be liable for any damage to property and life. If an accident were to occur, the responsibility for all liabilities would fall into dispute between the user and the other party.  The bikeshare will provide robust methods of identifying bikes on the road including, but not limited to, front and back lights and bells. Furthermore, as stated in the previous paragraph, the user will be encouraged to use best accident preventive bicycling practices that protect both the biker and those on the road.

Theft.  To combat the theft of bicycles and equipment, precautions will be built into the bike around the seat post facing the back wheel in an attempt to limit the amount of theft.  The lock and electronics box themselves will be welded to the bicycle and unable to be removed.  The lock will be built with a pressurized compartment of ink within its metal arms.  This simple device will act as a deterrence from cutting the locking arms to steal the bike.  If cut or broken, the ink will explode caused from the heat and pressure associated with cutting.  The ink will mark the ground as well as anything else around the bicycle.  If a bicycle is stolen, the ink mark will differentiate user error from theft.  The bicycle will be outfitted unique bolts that allow only bikeshare administrators to unlock them.  This will cut down on the common theft of wheels and other easily removable items on the bike.  Although no system is safe from theft or vandalism, these precautions built into the bike will hopefully deter theft and other misuses.

Maintenance.  An important problem in the upkeep of bikeshares is that when the bicycles are broken, they need to be fixed right away to ensure the safety of users and to increase the longevity of the bicycles.  Since the system is stationless, bicycle maintenance needs to be more than manually checking each station and ensuring the bicycles of each station look well-maintained.  The bikeshare bicycles can be found by GPS, but it would be a hassle to search for each bicycle on the entire campus for maintenance checks.  Instead, the bikeshare will utilize the user to give an alert when he/she thinks there is a maintenance issue.  The bikeshare application will allow users to report problems with the bicycles and include pictures.  With these reports, the bicycle can be found and the problem can be fixed before any other users ride the bicycle, which could minimize potential injuries resulting from faulty machinery on the bicycle.

Unique bikeshare problems.  Since the bikeshare has features that are novel and not present in current systems, potential unique problems are created.  These include: improper locking, protecting the electronic housing and on-bike power system, and the limitation of having an open coverage area.  The team looks to extrapolate and mitigate these problems with the suggestions in the following sections.

Improper locking.  Unlike traditional bikeshare where the user needs to return a bike to a docking station, this bikeshare allows the user to lock a bike to any bike rack in the system’s coverage area.  A user may improperly lock a bike by locking it outside this area or they simply may not lock the bike properly to a rack.  As described above, the system will alert a user if they are almost up with their allotted time.  This may be a signal to the user that they did not properly lock the bike in the coverage area, or failed to properly lock the bike even though it is inside the coverage area.  If a user properly sets the lock in a locked position but fails to lock the bike around a rack, the bike will be registered as available in the system since it is in the locked position.  Unfortunately, since the bike is not properly locked, someone not registered can easily take the bike.  Since the user does not need to unlock the bike to use it, the system still thinks the bike is available at that location since the lock was never powered on or unlocked in the eyes of the system.

This second scenario is caused because of user error whether intentional or not.  Education during the on boarding process on how to properly lock the bike around a bike rack can help to lower the number of incidents of this type.  Currently, the pressurized ink theft deterrence would give insight into whether a bike was stolen or whether user error resulted in the bike being taken.  If no ink is present on the ground or around the last known location of the bike, it could be assumed that the bike was taken as a result of the failure to properly lock the bicycle.  If this is deemed the case, the cost of the bicycle, which include the cost of the customized lock, parts, and hardware stolen would need to be paid by the user who is at fault.

Other precautionary measures to inform users of properly failing to lock a bike around a rack could be built into the system.  These could include making the bike immovable while the lock is in the locked position.  While in the locked position, the lock itself may prevent the rear wheel from turning.  This would cause an improperly locked bike to have to be carried away rather than rode away.  Carrying a bike would easily deter the theft of it since this would attract attention to the crime in process.  The team is also actively thinking of other ways to build precautionary measures to deter theft from user error.

Electronic housing and battery.  Another unique problem of the bikeshare that could arise is the maintenance of the electronics housing and battery on each bicycle.  Every bicycle will have weatherproof electronic housing to maximize the lifespan of the electronics within.  As the battery powering the electronics on the bicycle is not rechargeable, a replacement is required at the end of the battery’s lifespan.  To prevent the possibility of a user riding a bicycle with a dead battery, a fail-safe will be built into the code so the bicycle cannot be unlocked and used when the battery is running low.  This will minimize the possibility of losing the location of a bicycle or having a bicycle improperly locked due to a dead battery.

Coverage area.  Unique to the bikeshare is the limit imposed by the coverage area, which poses multiple challenges to the operation of the system.  Unlike traditional systems where the bounds of use are restricted to locking the bicycle at docking stations around the metropolitan area, this stationless bikeshare has no defined bounds.  Users may be unsure of where and how a bicycle can be locked without incurring fees for improper locking or taking a bicycle outside the range of coverage.  To minimize this problem, the team proposes the following solutions.

First, to inform students of the coverage area, the bicycle racks in the bikeshare zone can be found on a campus map on the bikeshare’s homepage and phone application.  A user can quickly check if a bicycle rack is in the bikeshare zone before he or she starts their journey.  In addition to students being able to check the bikeshare’s campus coverage map, the school may choose to post signs or stickers on the bike racks signifying that the rack is covered in the ZigBee grid.

The next problem that the bikeshare can address is the limitations of the coverage area.  When large metropolitan areas need to expand their network it takes time, money, and space.  Planning and funding need to be resourced and allocated before the proper steps are taken to construct a docking station.  A ZigBee connected system can be expanded quickly wherever there is user demand.  Since the bikeshare relies on already available infrastructure in the form of bike racks, the cost is only limited to the monetary amount associated with a coordinator unit.  This allows the administrator to quickly expand the coverage area to areas with weak coverage on campus, off campus housing units, and other popular destinations off campus.

By implementing this type of bikeshare, the administrator can create and modify the coverage area to reach all the places that students are likely to frequent.  The area covered can be added, removed, transferred, or strengthened relatively quickly, easily, and affordably.  All of these factors give the ZigBee connected bikeshare multiple advantages over competitors.

Cost analysis.  Team BIKES took on the project as a means of providing a cheaper alternative to bikeshare administrators, especially college campuses.  Looking at a number of bikeshare systems around the country, the team wanted to gauge how many bikes would be needed on the University of Maryland’s campus.  Figure 57 below shows the number of bikes per 10,000 people in that bikeshare’s target population.

Figure 57.  Number of bikes per 10,000 people in bikeshares around the country.

In order to attain a distribution level on par with metropolitan bikeshares, the team would need to purchase 80 bikes.  However, to be on par with the other college bikeshares, UBike and Zotwheels, the team would need to have 120 bikes.

According the Diamondback, the University currently has plans to welcome a stationed bikeshare to campus in May, 2015.  The bikeshare has plans to construct seven stations with 120 bikes, and the school received a grant for $375,000 to help with the costs of the system (Lang, March 2016).  The breakdown of Team BIKES proposed system comes at a much cheaper cost than the grant the school was awarded.  The costs that the team used in the estimates are rough and most likely much greater than the actual costs when purchasing materials, bikes, and labor in bulk.  The costs are below in Figure 58.

Figure 58.  Cost Analysis.

Implementing a 120 bike system on Maryland’s campus would cost approximately $125,160, which is only 33% the cost of the grant that the university was awarded.  Without factoring in operating expenses, the costs associated with Team BIKES system is a dramatic reduction in upstart costs, and this as well as all the other benefits of the team’s proposed system make it a very attractive product.
