## Integration Demo 3: Multiple Smartlock Prototype Units
Following the second demonstration, the prototype system needed to be expanded to support multiple end devices and multiple routers.  The objective was to prove that the ZigBee protocol implemented through the use of XBees could be easily scaled with the authentication process.  In the iteration, two end device systems, two routers, and one coordinator system were used to demonstrate the coordinator’s ability to handle multiple transmissions, the interchangeability of users’ NFC cards, and the XBee’s ability to use intermediary routers to expand the network size.
The prototype smartlock system used in the previous demonstration was duplicated to act as an additional bicycle unit in the proposed bikeshare.  With both units functioning independently, the two were connected to the same coordinator node.  To simulate two users requesting a bicycle at the same time, an NFC card was presented to each of the prototype smartlocks simultaneously, and as expected, the web application received the CSV strings from both without any loss of data.  When alternating the NFC cards between the smartlocks, the CSV strings arrived with swapped user fields accordingly.
The final step of the demo took the end device system out of range of the coordinator to show how when a bike would lose connection with the XBee coordinator, it could reconnect to another available router using the ZigBee mesh network protocols.  With the end device no longer visible by the coordinator XBee, the end device could still see a router and send the CSV formatted data.  Even with the packet being routed through an additional node in the network, the website continued to accurately receive live data, demonstrating the scalable routing capabilities of the mesh network.
With the success of a multiunit system, the team sought a way to further scale the system and to circumvent the need for a laptop tethered to the coordinator.  Using the cost-effective Raspberry Pi, the intermediary app was installed and ran with a directly connected XBee coordinator.  This system was more power efficient, cheaper, and space efficient allowing it to be installed throughout campus as a bikeshare and in strategic locations.  By improving the overall efficiency of the XBee-Meteor interface, the cost of developing a multi-coordinator network becomes significantly reduced.  With the network proposed in the implementation section, the change affects as many as sixteen nodes, greatly improving the overall bikeshare network.