## Integration Demo 1: Arduino to Website through XBee

The first demonstration established the connection between an XBee network and the Meteor website.  The objective of the first demonstration was to prove that the XBee network could successfully pass information from an end device to a web application, which could include GPS information to aid in locating available bikes or lock status among other pertinent information.  The demonstration included a laptop running a Node.js parsing application and the web application, two XBee devices, and end device (AT mode) and a coordinator (API mode), and an Arduino to simulate the smartlock.
In the completed bikeshare, information would be regularly passed from each bike, through the XBee network, and then regulated by the server.  To simulate this structure, an XBee end device was connected to an Arduino, which repeatedly printed a CSV formatted string with fake data to mimic the way the Smartlock would operate.  Upon receipt of the CSV string, the end device would wirelessly send the message to the coordinator, which would relay the message over a serial USB connection to the laptop.  During the wireless transmission between the two XBee devices, the message was transformed from a CSV string to an XBee packet.  To interpret the message, a parsing application was necessary.
To communicate between the XBee coordinator and the hosted web application, an intermediary was necessary.  Connecting directly to the hosted application would be infeasible because the direct connection would require hosting the application from a local server, which would be cost-prohibitive and more prone to outages.  The intermediary would thus aid in scaling the system and provide a cost-effective solution to managing communication.  The intermediary was built using the same platform that Meteor was built on top of, Node.js.  As a barebones application, it would only need to maintain a serial, USB connection, parse incoming data, and securely connect with the hosted application.  To accomplish each of these tasks, the intermediary applications used a series of open-source Node packages managed through the Node Package Manager (NPM).  The intermediary application could then be run any small computer connected to an XBee coordinator.  The application would insert the collected CSV information through the secure connection the hosted web applications database.  The data would then be displayed in real time to any user viewing the hosted Meteor application.
